Express universal logout (#1504)
oktadeveloper/okta-blog: _source/_posts/2024-04-30-express-universal-logout.md

---
layout: blog_post
title: "How to Instantly Sign a User Out across All Your Apps"
author: semona-igama
by: advocate
communities: [devops,security,mobile,.net,java,javascript,go,php,python,ruby]
description: "Sign users out across all apps with a universal logout endpoint."
tags: [enterprise-ready-workshops, express, oidc, universal-logout]
tweets:
- ""
- ""
- ""
image: blog/express-universal-logout/social.jpg
type: awareness
github: https://github.com/oktadev/okta-enterprise-ready-workshops/tree/ul-workshop-complete
---

> Your enterprise customers expect you to safeguard them from common security incidents, especially when it comes to compromised user accounts. Perhaps a user has signed in from a known stolen device or another country outside the list of allowed IP zones. If a hacker is masquerading as one of your customer's employees, potentially accessing sensitive company data, you must end their session and log them out of your app immediately. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Your enterprise customers expect you to safeguard them from common security incidents, especially when it comes to compromised user accounts. Perhaps a user has signed in from a known stolen device or another country outside the list of allowed IP zones. If a hacker is masquerading as one of your customer's employees, potentially accessing sensitive company data, you must end their session and sign them out of your app immediately. 
```

Bottom line, if you build SaaS applications for enterprise-level customers who leverage Identity Providers (IdPs), workflows, and threat-detection tools, then adding Universal Logout to your app is the solution to ending suspicious user sessions ASAP. 

> In this tutorial, you will learn to add a secure Universal Logout API endpoint to a web app, test it by sending a request to end a user's active session, and finally handle signing them out of the app. Lastly, we'll use Okta as the IdP to initiate user logout.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In this tutorial, you'll learn to add a secure Universal Logout API endpoint to a web app, test it by sending a request to end a user's active session, and finally handle signing them out of the app. You'll use Okta as the IdP to sign the user out.
```

> In this tutorial, you'll learn to add a secure Universal Logout API endpoint to a web app, test it by sending a request to end a user's active session, and finally handle signing them out of the app. However, we will not cover initiating user logout through an IdP, i.e. Okta, as this feature is soon to come.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In this tutorial, you'll learn to add a secure Universal Logout API endpoint to a web app, test it by sending a request to end a user's active session, and finally handle signing them out of the app. However, we will not cover initiating user sign-out through an IdP, i.e. Okta, as this feature is soon to come.
```

> >**Note**: You can follow along with this blog to build a Universal Logout or jump ahead to the completed project [ul-workshop-complete]() on our Oktadev GitHub repository.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
>**Note**: You can follow along with this blog to build a Universal Logout or check out the finished code on the [ul-workshop-complete](https://github.com/oktadev/okta-enterprise-ready-workshops/tree/ul-workshop-complete) branch of our Oktadev GitHub repository.
```

{% include toc.md %}

## Get the sample app up and running

**Prerequisites**

> - Enterprise Ready OIDC Workshop - [oidc-workshop-complete](https://github.com/oktadev/okta-enterprise-ready-workshops/tree/oidc-workshop-complete)

Reviewer 3: We should have the series links to the other workshops in here as this one builds upon a previous one.

- Code Editor (I used [Visual Studio Code](https://code.visualstudio.com/download)) 
- [Okta Developer Account](https://developer.okta.com/signup/)
- [Node.js](https://nodejs.org/en) v18 or greater

> Follow [these setup instructions](/blog/2023/07/27/enterprise-ready-getting-started) to install and run the Todo sample app. Run `node -v` and ensure you have Node version 18 or newer. 

Reviewer 3: There is a strict engine check in the package.json to ensure Node version. If you want to have this disclaimer, it should be prior to the first sentence.

> >**Note**: If you have already completed the [Enterprise Ready OIDC Workshop](/blog/2023/07/28/oidc_workshop) and can successfully run the Todo app with OIDC-SSO configured with Okta, please skip to the **Build a Universal Logout endpoint section and secure it**. If you haven't, please read on.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
>**Note**: If you have already completed the [Enterprise Ready OIDC Workshop](/blog/2023/07/28/oidc_workshop) and can successfully run the Todo app with OIDC-SSO configured with Okta, please skip to **Build a Universal Logout endpoint section and secure it**. If you haven't, please read on.
```

Reviewer: ```suggestion
>**Note**: If you have already completed the [Enterprise Ready OIDC Workshop](/blog/2023/07/28/oidc_workshop) and can successfully run the Todo app with OIDC-SSO configured with Okta, you can skip to **Build a Universal Logout endpoint section and secure it**. If you haven't, please read on.
```

> We will build the Universal Logout (UL) endpoint on [the sample app](https://github.com/oktadev/okta-enterprise-ready-workshops/) with OIDC support implemented. After cloning the repo, check out the oidc-workshop-complete branch with git checkout **oidc-workshop-complete**. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We'll build the Universal Logout (UL) endpoint on [the sample app](https://github.com/oktadev/okta-enterprise-ready-workshops/) with OIDC support implemented. After cloning the repo, check out the oidc-workshop-complete branch with git checkout **oidc-workshop-complete**. 
```

> >**Troubleshooting tips**: Ensure you can run the Todo application before you begin. We will be adding some code and testing along the way. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
>**Troubleshooting tips**: Ensure you can run the Todo application before you begin. We'll be adding some code and testing along the way. 
```

> >**Troubleshooting tips**: Ensure you can run the Todo application before you begin. We will be adding some code and testing along the way. 

Reviewer 3: You may want to consider being explicit running, signing in as a user within Okta, adding a todo, and signisng out.

> ### Sign up with Okta

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
### Create a free Okta Developer Edition account
```

> If you don't already have an Okta account, you can sign up for one here under [Workforce Identity Cloud – Developer Edition](https://developer.okta.com/signup/). You'll also need to create an [OIDC application](https://developer.okta.com/docs/guides/implement-grant-type/authcode/main/#set-up-your-app), which you can do by following the instructions listed here under Setup your app.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
If you don't already have an Okta account, you can sign up for one here under [Workforce Identity Cloud – Developer Edition](https://developer.okta.com/signup/). You'll also need to create an [OpenID Connect (OIDC) application](https://developer.okta.com/docs/guides/implement-grant-type/authcode/main/#set-up-your-app), which you can do by following the instructions listed here under Setup your app.
```

>**Note**: Take note of your client_id and client_secret info, you'll need this in the following step.

> ### Add your OIDC integration details to the app

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
### Add configuration to authenticate with OIDC
```
Something like that to work in keywords and search terms

> You can view the user table locally using Prisma. To do this, go to the root of this workshop folder in your terminal and run `npx prisma studio`. Your browser will open a new web page where you can see all the users in your database.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
You can view the user table locally using Prisma Studio. To do this, go to the root of this workshop folder in your terminal and run `npx prisma studio`. Your browser will open a new web page where you can see all the users in your database.
```

> While viewing your database locally, you will also see an org table. You can manually input the following info to seed your database with an org linked to an Okta authorization server, allowing OIDC SSO login.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
While viewing your database locally, you'll also see an org table. You can manually input the following info to seed your database with an org linked to an Okta authorization server, allowing OIDC SSO sign-in.
```

- id # = 1
- domain = whiterabbit.fake
- issuer = https://${yourOktaDomain}
- authorization_endpoint = https://${yourOktaDomain}/oauth2/v1/authorize
- token_endpoint = https://${yourOktaDomain}/oauth2/v1/token
- userinfo_endpoint = https://${yourOktaDomain}/oauth2/v1/userinfo
- client_id = ${ClientId}
- client_secret = ${ClientSecret}
- apikey = 131313

### Create a test user

> To test whether UL works for our app, we'll create a new user on Okta whose account we will forcibly sign out. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To test whether UL works for our app, we'll create a user on Okta whose account we'll forcibly sign out. 
```

> Open the Admin Console for your org, and go to **Directory** > **People**. Click Add Person and create a person with the following properties:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Open the Admin Console for your org, and go to **Directory** > **People**. Click **Add Person** and create a person with the following properties:
```

> Open the Admin Console for your org, and go to **Directory** > **People**. Click Add Person and create a person with the following properties:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Open the Admin Console for your org, and go to **Directory** > **People**. Click **Add Person** and create a person with the following properties:
```

Consistently bold UI text

- User type: User
- First name: Trinity
- Last name: Anderson
- Username: trinity@whiterabbit.fake
- Activation: Activate now

> - Enter a password of your own choice, and click Save.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- Enter a password of your choosing and click **Save**
```
Consistently bold, consistent punctuation with reminder of list items.

### Migrate the test user

Now that you have a user on the Okta side. Let's migrate Trinity (within the Todo app) to the correct org according to her company domain. Run the following command and then check the Prisma database to see if Trinity is linked to the whiterabbit.fake domain (org #1).

```shell
​npm run oidc-migrate whiterabbit.fake
```

> Lastly, test that the user can log in via the Okta.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Finally, test that the user can sign in to the app.
```

> Now that you have a user on the Okta side. Let's migrate Trinity (within the Todo app) to the correct org according to her company domain. Run the following command and then check the Prisma database to see if Trinity is linked to the whiterabbit.fake domain (org #1).

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Now that you have a user in Okta. Let's migrate Trinity to the correct Todo App org according to her company domain. Run the following command and then check the Prisma database to see if Trinity is linked to the whiterabbit.fake domain (org #1).
```

## Build a Universal Logout endpoint and secure it

Now that we have the app set up, we'll extend it to include a UL endpoint. In this section, we'll test the endpoint, secure it, log a user out, and finally end their session.

> ## Create the basic endpoint

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
## Create the required token revocation endpoint
```

working in keywords/search and substituting basic for a more precise term

> Now that we have the app set up, we'll extend it to include a UL endpoint. In this section, we'll test the endpoint, secure it, log a user out, and finally end their session.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Now that we have the app set up, we'll extend it to include a UL endpoint. In this section, we'll test the endpoint, secure it, sign a user out, and finally end their session.
```

Create a file called `universalLogout.ts` under the `apps/api/src` folder and, at the top of the file, import `Router` from Express. From here, create a route called `universalLogoutRoute` and export it. 

```ts
import { Router } from 'express';
export const universalLogoutRoute = Router();
```

> Let's add the route within this file. It will look like the following:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Let's add the UL route to this file:
```

```ts
import { Router } from 'express';
export const universalLogoutRoute = Router();

universalLogoutRoute.post('/global-token-revocation', async (req, res) => {
// Build logic for our route here.
 });
```

Moving along, import `UniversalLogoutRoute` from `universalLogout.ts` at the top of `apps/api/src/main.ts`.

```ts
import { universalLogoutRoute } from './universalLogout';
```

The file will now look like this:

```ts
import express from 'express';
import { PrismaClient, Todo, User } from '@prisma/client';

> import passportLocal from 'passport-local';

Reviewer 3: I don't think you need passportLocal, passport, and session in this file (similarly to it not being required in the scim routes file). I believe you're only using those within the main.ts.

I highly recommend removing these if it's not required

Author: ok I made clear which file I was talking about

import passport from 'passport';
import session from 'express-session';
import { universalLogoutRoute } from './universalLogout';
```

> Add your UL route at the end of the OIDC-related code section. As shown below

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Add your UL route at the end of the OIDC-related code section:
```

```ts
///////////////////////////////////////////////////////
// Universal Logout Route

app.use('/', universalLogoutRoute);
```

> Let's circle back to the `apps/api/src/universalLogout.ts` file and add more requirements to set up our UL endpoint. Let's include the Prisma Client to access our database of users, so at the top of the file, add the line `import { PrismaClient } from '@prisma/client;` the file will now look like this:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Let's circle back to the `apps/api/src/universalLogout.ts` file and add more requirements to set up our UL endpoint. Let's include the Prisma client to access our database of users, so at the top of the file, add the line `import { PrismaClient } from '@prisma/client;`:
```

```ts
import { Router } from 'express';
export const universalLogoutRoute = Router();
import { PrismaClient } from '@prisma/client';
```

> We'll need to instantiate a Prisma Client and add a TypeScript interface to ensure the request coming to our endpoint is the data type we expect. As per the [Global Token Revocation Specification](https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/draft-parecki-oauth-global-token-revocation#name-revocation-request), we are expecting an external request to end a user's session based on the email used to SSO with their IdP. The request will look like the following:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We'll need to instantiate a Prisma client and add a TypeScript interface to ensure the request coming to our endpoint is the data type we expect. As per the [Global Token Revocation Specification](https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/draft-parecki-oauth-global-token-revocation#name-revocation-request), we are expecting an external request to end a user's session based on the email used to SSO with their IdP. The request will look like the following:
```

> ```

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```http
```

> We'll need to instantiate a Prisma Client and add a TypeScript interface to ensure the request coming to our endpoint is the data type we expect. As per the [Global Token Revocation Specification](https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/draft-parecki-oauth-global-token-revocation#name-revocation-request), we are expecting an external request to end a user's session based on the email used to SSO with their IdP. The request will look like the following:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
We'll need to instantiate a Prisma Client and define a TypeScript interface to ensure the request coming to our endpoint is the data type we expect. As per the [Global Token Revocation Specification](https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/draft-parecki-oauth-global-token-revocation#name-revocation-request), we are expecting an external request to end a user's session based on the email used to SSO with their IdP. The request will look like the following:
```

POST /global-token-revocation
Host: example.com
Content-Type: application/json
Authorization: Bearer f5641763544a7b24b08e4f74045

{
  "sub_id": {
    "format": "email",
    "email": "user@example.com"
  }
}
```

Add the following code to find a user in the database by email.

```ts
const prisma = new PrismaClient();

interface IRequestSchema {
  'sub_id': {format:string; email: string};
}

> universalLogoutRoute.post('/global-token-revocation', async (req, res) => {

Reviewer 3: it looks like you add a middleware to check authorization header apikey later. should this code be added as part of that via a middleware?

Author: I'm removing all traces of checking authHeaders, as the middleware does this for me. This was trace code from testing private key jwt.

  // 204 When the request is successful
  const httpStatus = 204;

  // 400 If the request is malformed
  if (!req.body) {
    res.status(400);
  }
  
  // Make sure an API token is passed

>   const authHeaders = req.headers.authorization

Reviewer 3: Missing semicolons throughout. it should be consistent (with semicolons)

  if(!authHeaders){
    return res.sendStatus(401)
  }
	
  // Find the user by email linked to the org id associated with the API key provided
 const domainOrgId = req['user']['id']
  const newRequest:IRequestSchema = req.body;
  const { email } = newRequest.sub_id;
  const user = await prisma.user.findFirst({
    where: {
      email: email,
      org: { id: domainOrgId } ,
    },
  });

  // 404 User not found 
  if (!user) {
    res.sendStatus(404);
  }
```

> >**Checkpoint**: Now is an excellent time to test our code. 

Reviewer 2: 😍 what a seamless way to sneak in the testing step! I like it!

> ### Test the basic endpoint

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
### Test the token revocation endpoint
```

> Before we proceed, let's make sure the basic endpoint is working. We'll use [cURL](https://curl.se/docs/httpscripting.html) to send requests to the endpoint and [Morgan](https://www.npmjs.com/package/morgan), an HTTP logger middleware to see the response codes it returns.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Before we proceed, let's make sure the token revocation endpoint works. We'll use [cURL](https://curl.se/docs/httpscripting.html) to send requests to the endpoint and [Morgan](https://www.npmjs.com/package/morgan), an HTTP logger middleware to see the response codes it returns.
```

In a new terminal, install Morgan with the following command:

```shell
npm install morgan
```

> Then, import Morgan at the top of the `apps/api/src/main.ts` file. It will look like this:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Then, import Morgan at the top of the `apps/api/src/main.ts` file:
```

> npm install morgan

Reviewer 3: Pin version

```ts
import express from 'express';
import { PrismaClient, Todo, User } from '@prisma/client';
import passportLocal from 'passport-local';
import passportOIDC from 'passport-openidconnect';
import passport from 'passport';
import session from 'express-session';
import { universalLogoutRoute } from './universal-logout';
import morgan from 'morgan';
```

> Add the following line in the `apps/api/src/main.ts` file and within your UL Route section to instruct the server to use Morgan:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Add the following line to your UL route in `apps/api/src/main.ts`. It instructs the server to use Morgan:
```

> Add the following line in the `apps/api/src/main.ts` file and within your UL Route section to instruct the server to use Morgan:

Reviewer 3: do we define UL elsewhere?

```ts
app.use(morgan('combined'))
```

The UL section will now look like this:

```ts
///////////////////////////////////////////////////////
// Universal Logout Route

app.use(morgan('combined'))

app.use('/', universalLogoutRoute);
```

On a new terminal window, let's test a request through cURL. Paste the following code in the terminal:

```
curl --request POST \
  --url http://localhost:3333/global-token-revocation \
  --header 'Content-Type: application/json' \
  --data '{
  "sub_id": {
    "format": "email",
    "email": "trinity@whiterabbit.fake"
  }
}'
```

> This request will result in a 204 response confirming that a user named Trinity exists in our database. Sure, we got a successful response, but what is wrong here? This endpoint isn't secure; we've made it available for anyone to access. Let's fix this by adding authentication to protect this endpoint and establish trust between our server and any external service making a request to this route.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This request will result in a 204 response confirming that a user named Trinity exists in our database. Sure, we got a successful response, but what is wrong here? This endpoint isn't secure. We've made it available for anyone to access. Let's fix this by adding authentication to protect this endpoint and establish trust between our server and any external service making a request to this route.
```

## Allow only authorized access to the endpoint

To protect the UL endpoint, add the [passportBearer library](https://www.passportjs.org/packages/passport-http-bearer/). 

In your terminal, run the following commands:

```shell
npm install passport-http-bearer
npm install @types/passport-http-bearer -D
```

> Then import `passportBearer` at the top of `apps/api/src/main.ts`. It will look like this:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Then import `passportBearer` at the top of `apps/api/src/main.ts`:
```

import passportOIDC from 'passport-openidconnect';
import passport from 'passport';
import session from 'express-session';
import { universalLogoutRoute } from './universal-logout';
import morgan from 'morgan';

// Bearer Auth - Universal Logout
import passportBearer from 'passport-http-bearer';
```

In addition, create a token auth strategy called BearerStrategy in `apps/api/src/main.ts` and list it at the top of the file after the other token auth strategies.

```ts
import express from 'express';
import { PrismaClient, Todo, User } from '@prisma/client';
import passportLocal from 'passport-local';
import passportOIDC from 'passport-openidconnect';
import passport from 'passport';
import session from 'express-session';
import { universalLogoutRoute } from './universal-logout';
import morgan from 'morgan';

// Bearer Auth - Universal Logout
import passportBearer from 'passport-http-bearer';

interface IUser {
 id: number;
}

const prisma = new PrismaClient();
const LocalStrategy = passportLocal.Strategy;
const OpenIDConnectStrategy = passportOIDC.Strategy;

// Bearer Auth - Universal Logout
const BearerStrategy = passportBearer.Strategy;
```

> Lastly, add the token auth strategy to your UL-related code (just below the OIDC-related code). Notice how we are programmatically setting the Passport.js auth strategy to relate the API key to an existing org in our database. From here, we'll be able to have context about which org the incoming request is referring to. You can read more about this in the [Passport.js documentation](https://www.passportjs.org/concepts/authentication/http-bearer/).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Lastly, add the token auth strategy to your UL-related code (just below the OIDC-related code). Notice how we're setting the Passport.js auth strategy to relate the API key to an existing org in our database. From here, we'll be able to have context about which org the incoming request is referring to. You can read more about this in the [Passport.js documentation](https://www.passportjs.org/concepts/authentication/http-bearer/).
```

     where: {
       apikey: apikey
     }
   });
   return done(null, org);
 }
));
```

Update the UL endpoint by adding the following arguments passport.authenticate('bearer', { session: false }). The complete code will look like this:

>**Note**: The [Passport Library] (https://www.passportjs.org/packages/passport-http-bearer/) offers the option of setting the token authentication token session to false. We'll set it to false since we won't need a session in our use case.

```ts
///////////////////////////////////////////////////////
// Universal Logout Route

// Bearer Auth Strategy
passport.use(new BearerStrategy(
 async (apikey, done) => {
   const org = await prisma.org.findFirst({
     where: {
       apikey: apikey
     }
   });
   return done(null, org);
 }
));

app.use(morgan('combined'))

app.use('/', passport.authenticate('bearer', { session: false }), universalLogoutRoute);
```

>**Checkpoint**: Now test the same cURL command again:

```
curl --request POST \
  --url http://localhost:3333/global-token-revocation \
  --header 'Content-Type: application/json' \
  --data '{
  "sub_id": {
    "format": "email",
    "email": "trinity@whiterabbit.fake"
  }
}'
```

> You will get a 401 Unauthorized, meaning the authorization provided was invalid. This error is valid because we didn't send a token to our authorization headers. Let's fix that! We know from our database that the API key to our database is 131313. You can confirm this by opening another terminal and running `npx prisma studio`. A new window will open with a UI showing you the tables in your database; inspect the org table to see the column apikey for org 1. With that, go ahead and add this missing info to your cURL request. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You'll get a **401 Unauthorized** response, meaning the authorization provided was invalid. This error is valid because we didn't send a token to our authorization headers. Let's fix that! We know from our database that the API key to our database is 131313. You can confirm this by opening another terminal and running `npx prisma studio`. A new window will open with a UI showing you the tables in your database; inspect the org table to see the column apikey for org 1. With that, go ahead and add this missing info to your cURL request. 
```

> It is crucial to authenticate with the correct API key as it specifies the org with which the user is associated. We'll also need to incorporate this information into the code. How might you do that? Thanks to the Passport.js library and how we configured the auth strategy in the `apps/api/src/main.ts`, we have information about the org the request is about, which is stored in `req['user']`. Try adding `console.log(req['user'])` to see what I mean. Furthermore, we can now access the org context with `req['user']['id']`. We'll need this to find the exact user within a specific org, and it will be beneficial if your app handles multitenancy. Add the following code to `apps/api/src/universalLogout.ts`: 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
It's crucial to authenticate with the correct API key as it specifies the org with which the user is associated. We'll also need to incorporate this information into the code. How might you do that? Thanks to the Passport.js library and how we configured the auth strategy in the `apps/api/src/main.ts`, we have information about the org the request is about, which is stored in `req['user']`. Try adding `console.log(req['user'])` to see what I mean. Furthermore, we can now access the org context with `req['user']['id']`. We'll need this to find the exact user within a specific org, and it will be beneficial if your app handles multitenancy. Add the following code to `apps/api/src/universalLogout.ts`: 
```

```ts
universalLogoutRoute.post('/global-token-revocation', async (req, res) => {
  // 204 When the request is successful
  const httpStatus = 204;

  // 400 If the request is malformed
  if (!req.body) {
    res.status(400);
  }
  

>   // Make sure an API token is passed

Reviewer 3: Is this still required?

Author: nope

  const authHeaders = req.headers.authorization
  if(!authHeaders){
    return res.sendStatus(401)
  }

   // Find the user by email linked tothe org id associated with the API key provided
  const domainOrgId = req['user']['id']
  const newRequest:IRequestSchema = req.body;
  const { email } = newRequest.sub_id;
  const user = await prisma.user.findFirst({
    where: {
      email: email,
      org: { id: domainOrgId } ,
    },
  });

  // 404 User not found 
  if (!user) {
    res.sendStatus(404);
  }

universalLogoutRoute.use((err,req,res,next) => {
  if(err){

    return res.sendStatus(404)
  }
})
```

Moving right along, now that we have the target user of a specific org. Let's figure out how to target their application session and end it.

> ## Implement the forced logout for a user

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
## Implement the forced sign out for a user
```

> ## Implement the forced logout for a user

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Implement the forced sign-out for a user
```

> In this section, we'll work towards ending a user's session and logging them out of the app.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
In this section, we'll work towards ending a user's session and signing them out of the app.
```

> In this section, we'll work towards ending a user's session and logging them out of the app.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In this section, we'll work towards ending a user's session and signing them out of the app.
```

### End a user's session

> In Express, we'll need to access a user's session in the session store from the express-session library. Create a new file called sessionStore.ts under the `apps/api/src` folder and create a variable called store. A separate file to reference the `store` variable in multiple files. 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
In Express, we'll need to access a user's session in the session store from the `express-session` library. Create a new file called `sessionStore.ts` under the `apps/api/src` folder and create a variable named `store`. A separate file to reference the `store` variable in multiple files. 
```

I don't understand what the stand-alone sentence
> A separate file to reference file to reference the `store` variables in multiple files. 

means. I think it's missing something.

Author: addressed by adding the following sentences:

Notice we created a separate file to reference `store` in multiple files. For example, we'll need it in the `apps/api/src/main.ts` file and the `apps/api/src/universalLogout.ts` file.

> In Express, we'll need to access a user's session in the session store from the express-session library. Create a new file called sessionStore.ts under the `apps/api/src` folder and create a variable called store. A separate file to reference the `store` variable in multiple files. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In Express, we'll need to access a user's session in the session store from the express-session library. Create a file called `sessionStore.ts` under the `apps/api/src` folder and create a variable called `store`. A separate file to reference the `store` variable in multiple files. 
```

Reviewer: @isemona This last sentence "A separate file to reference the `store` variable in multiple files. " isn't a sentence. Can you check please?

```ts
import {MemoryStore} from 'express-session';

> export const store = new MemoryStore()

Reviewer 3: add semicolons throughout

```

For now, import `store` from the `session/Store` file at the top of the `apps/api/src/main.ts`. 

```ts
import { store } from './sessionsStore';
```

> The top of the `apps/api/src/main.ts` file will now look like this:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The top of the `apps/api/src/main.ts` file now looks like this:
```

```ts
import express from 'express';
import { PrismaClient, Todo, User } from '@prisma/client';
import passportLocal from 'passport-local';
import passportOIDC from 'passport-openidconnect';
import passport from 'passport';
import session from 'express-session';
import { universalLogoutRoute } from './universalLogout';
import morgan from 'morgan';

// Bearer Auth - Universal Logout
import passportBearer from 'passport-http-bearer';
import { store } from './sessionsStore';
```

> Now add store within your session configuration:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Now add `store` within your session configuration:
```
i had to reread this sentence several times because I kept trying to parse store as a verb... looking closer at the context says we're referring to what we just imported so preformatted would be a helpful hint

```ts
app.use(session({
 resave: false,
 saveUninitialized: false,
 secret: 'top secret',
 cookie: {
   http: false,
   sameSite: 'lax'
 },
 store
}));
```

> Notice how the user session is configured in the `apps/api/src/main.ts` file via the Passport.js library's serialization and deserialization functions. We can instruct the Passport.js library to reference a user's session via user.id; this will come in handy soon. If you are curious, you can read more about how this works in the [Passport.js documentation](https://www.passportjs.org/concepts/authentication/sessions/). 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Notice how the user session is configured in the `apps/api/src/main.ts` file via the Passport.js library's serialization and deserialization functions. We can instruct the Passport.js library to reference a user's session via `user.id`; this will come in handy soon. If you are curious, you can read more about how this works in the [Passport.js documentation](https://www.passportjs.org/concepts/authentication/sessions/). 
```

> Notice how the user session is configured in the `apps/api/src/main.ts` file via the Passport.js library's serialization and deserialization functions. We can instruct the Passport.js library to reference a user's session via user.id; this will come in handy soon. If you are curious, you can read more about how this works in the [Passport.js documentation](https://www.passportjs.org/concepts/authentication/sessions/). 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Notice how the user session is configured in the `apps/api/src/main.ts` file with the Passport.js library's serialization and deserialization functions. We reference a specific user's session with their `user.id`. If you're curious, you can read more about how this works in the [Passport.js documentation](https://www.passportjs.org/concepts/authentication/sessions/). 
```

Reviewer: @isemona One style rule here is not to use Latin phrases like "via", "etc", etc. They can always be replaced with an English equivalent.

```ts
passport.serializeUser( async (user: IUser, done) => {
 done(null, user.id);
});

passport.deserializeUser( async (id: number, done) => {
 const user: User = await prisma.user.findUnique({
   where: {
    id
   }
 });

 done(null, user);
});
```

> Next, import the variable store at the top of the `apps/api/src/universalLogout.ts` file. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Next, import `store` at the top of `apps/api/src/universalLogout.ts`: 
```

```ts
import { Router } from 'express';
export const universalLogoutRoute = Router();
import { PrismaClient } from '@prisma/client';
import { store } from './sessionsStore';
```

So far, we know the user's email from the request to the UL endpoint and have associated the user with an org via the provided API key. Now that we have the user object, we can associate the user's user ID with the session object. Add the following code to find and terminate a user's session.

```ts
// End user session
  const storedSession = store.sessions;
  const userId = user.id;
  const sids = [];
  Object.keys(storedSession).forEach((key) => {
    const sess = JSON.parse(storedSession[key]);
    if (sess.passport.user === userId) {
      sids.push(key);
    }
  });

>   sids.map((sid) => store.destroy(sid));

Reviewer 3: IMO I think this whole section's code can be optimized, but at the very least, we should use a `forEach` or `for of` to destroy. map implies you're mapping contents of the `sids` array to another type or format. that's not what's going on.

Author: Thank you, will fix this on my next iteration of improvements.

  if (!req.body) {
    res.status(400);
  }
  
  // Make sure an API token is passed
  const authHeaders = req.headers.authorization
  if(!authHeaders){
    return res.sendStatus(401)
  }
	
  // Find the user by email linked to the org id associated with the API key provided
 const domainOrgId = req['user']['id']
  const newRequest:IRequestSchema = req.body;
  const { email } = newRequest.sub_id;
  const user = await prisma.user.findFirst({
    where: {
      email: email,
      org: { id: domainOrgId } ,
    },
  });

  // 404 User not found 
  if (!user) {
    res.sendStatus(404);
  }

  // End user session
  const storedSession = store.sessions;
  const userId = user.id;
  const sids = [];
  Object.keys(storedSession).forEach((key) => {
    const sess = JSON.parse(storedSession[key]);
    if (sess.passport.user === userId) {
      sids.push(key);
    }
  });

  sids.map((sid) => store.destroy(sid));
  console.log('User session deleted')
  return res.sendStatus(httpStatus);
});

universalLogoutRoute.use((err,req,res,next) => {
  if(err){

    return res.sendStatus(404)
  }
})
```

>**Checkpoint**: Now will be an excellent time to test our code. 

> Let's sign in to the Todo app with Trinity's credentials email: trinity@whiterabbit.fake and the temporary password: Zion123$. Okta will redirect you and prompt you to update the password. When you redirect back to the Todo app, you will have an active session; you can test this by adding a new task. Let's test ending this session by sending a cURL request.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Let's sign in to the Todo app with Trinity's credentials email: trinity@whiterabbit.fake and the temporary password: Zion123$. Okta will redirect you and prompt you to update the password. When you redirect back to the Todo app, you'll have an active session; you can test this by adding a task. Let's test ending this session by sending a cURL request.
```

> ```

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```http
```

curl --request POST \
  --url http://localhost:3333/global-token-revocation \
  --header 'Authorization: Bearer 131313' \
  --header 'Content-Type: application/json' \
  --data '{
  "sub_id": {
    "format": "email",
    "email": "trinity@whiterabbit.fake"
  }
}'
```

> Check that you get a 204 response, and then try to add another Todo task to see what happens. You won't be able to add another task, and if you open the dev tools and inspect the console tab, you will see a 401 Unauthorized error. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Check that you get a 204 response, and then try to add another Todo task to see what happens. You won't be able to add another task, and if you open the dev tools and inspect the console tab, you'll see a **401 Unauthorized** error. 
```

> We accomplished our goal of ending a user's session, but the user can still see the contents of the webpage. Let's ensure we fully log them out by refreshing the browser and redirecting them to the main sign-in page—forcing the user to reauthenticate.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We accomplished our goal of ending a user's session, but the user can still see the contents of the webpage. Let's ensure we fully sign them out by refreshing the browser and redirecting them to the main sign-in page—forcing the user to reauthenticate.
```

### Sign a user out of the Todo app

> Under the `apps/todo-app/src/app/components/todolist.tsx` file. Find the function for creating a new task onNewTask function and add the following code to catch a 401 error and redirect them back to the login page.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Open `apps/todo-app/src/app/components/todolist.tsx` and find 'onNewTask', the function that creates tasks. Add the following code to catch a 401 error and redirect the user back to the sign-in page.
```

```ts
 if (!res.ok)
{if (res.status === 401) {

> // Redirect user back to login

Reviewer: ```suggestion
// Redirect user back to the sign-in page
```

window.location.href = '/';
        } else {
          // Handle other errors
          throw new Error('Error occurred while fetching data');
        }}     

> The onNewTask function will now look like this:

Reviewer 3: Should this be in code block?

Author: thank you!! for catching that!

import { useEffect, useState } from 'react';
import { useAuthState } from './authState';

interface ITodo {
  id: number;
  task: string;
  completed: boolean;
}

export const Todos = () => {
  const [todoList, setTodoList] = useState<ITodo[]>([]);
  const [newTask, setNewTask] = useState<string>('');
  const { authState } = useAuthState();

  const API_BASE_URL = '/api/todos';

  const onNewTask = () => { 
    const apiCall = async () => {
      try {
        const res = await fetch(API_BASE_URL, {
          method: 'POST',
          credentials: 'same-origin',
          mode: 'same-origin',
          headers: {
            'Content-Type': 'application/json'
          },
          body: JSON.stringify({ task: newTask })
        });

        if (!res.ok){if (res.status === 401) {

> // Redirect user back to login

Reviewer: ```suggestion
// Redirect user back to the sign in page
```

      }
    };
    apiCall();
  };

```

>**Checkpoint**: Let's retest, ending Trinity's session, and watch what happens when you attempt to add a new task to the Todo app.

>**Improve your code**: Notice the code above only handles a 401 response from the server when adding a new task. How might you handle 401 errors globally? You can use fetch or [Axios Interceptor](https://axios-http.com/docs/interceptors). The completed workshop code handles this using fetch; check it out here [Universal Logout Workshop Complete](https://github.com/oktadev/okta-enterprise-ready-workshops/blob/ul-workshop-complete/apps/todo-app/src/app/components/useTodoApi.tsx).

### Revoke a user's tokens
This web application architecture used cookie-based sessions instead of session tokens to authenticate to the backend resources. However, in the case of mobile apps and single-page applications, you will need to revoke refresh tokens on the frontend. As per the [spec](https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/draft-parecki-oauth-global-token-revocation#name-revocation-expectations), written by [Aaron Perecki](https://aaronparecki.com/) a successful logout will require revoking a user's refresh token. 

> ## Initate UL through Okta 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
## Initate Universal Logout through Okta 
```

reinforce search terms

> This web application architecture used cookie-based sessions instead of session tokens to authenticate to the backend resources. However, in the case of mobile apps and single-page applications, you will need to revoke refresh tokens on the frontend. As per the [spec](https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/draft-parecki-oauth-global-token-revocation#name-revocation-expectations), written by [Aaron Perecki](https://aaronparecki.com/) a successful logout will require revoking a user's refresh token. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This web application architecture uses cookie-based sessions instead of session tokens to authenticate to the backend resources. However, in the case of mobile apps and single-page applications, you'll need to revoke refresh tokens on the front end. As per the [spec](https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/draft-parecki-oauth-global-token-revocation#name-revocation-expectations), written by [Aaron Perecki](https://aaronparecki.com/) a successful sign-out will require revoking a user's refresh token. 
```

> This tutorial provides the fundamental steps to creating a UL endpoint to end a user's session or tokens. However, the UL feature is not yet available; once released, a secondary blog will be posted with further instructions on how to initiate logout with Okta. Stay tuned! For now, you can find the completed project [ul-workshop-complete](https://github.com/oktadev/okta-enterprise-ready-workshops/tree/ul-workshop-complete) on our Oktadev GitHub repository. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This tutorial provides the fundamental steps to creating a UL endpoint to end a user's session or tokens. However, the UL feature isn't available yet; once released, a secondary blog will be posted with further instructions on how to initiate sign-out with Okta. Stay tuned! For now, you can find the completed project [ul-workshop-complete](https://github.com/oktadev/okta-enterprise-ready-workshops/tree/ul-workshop-complete) on our Oktadev GitHub repository. 
```

> Follow us on [Twitter](https://twitter.com/oktadev) and subscribe to our [YouTube](https://www.youtube.com/c/oktadev) channel. If you have any questions about Universal Logout, please comment below!

Reviewer 3: Add links to other workshops?

Author: certainly, and done!
